Get Ur Geek On

DANIEL KITSON MAY LOOK LIKE SOME DERANGED ATTEMPT AT A HIGH TRASH PORN MEETS TRAMP COUPLING BUT THE GEEK-NOT-GEEK DOES MAKE COMEDIC SENSE. BLOODY GOOD JOB TOO...

Just as no profile of Dave Clarke, say, is complete without reference to his supposed moodiness, so every feature on stand-up Daniel Kitson alludes to the following distinguishing features. One: he has a bushy beard. Two: he wears thick specs. Three: he has a stutter, albeit a fairly minor one. All of which means, proclaims the 24-year-old York- shireman, that he looks like a pervert. A paedophile, in fact.

"I do," he insists, vainly attempting to stifle a yawn that's the result of staying up until the early hours in order to watch his beloved wrestling on TV. "I was on a train, and there was this little girl who was with a bloke who looked like a wino and was smoking a big spliff. I was sitting there thinking, 'That's quite a horrible situation for her to grow up in'. And he saw me looking at her and was like, 'What the fuck are you looking at her for, you pervert?'"

If offstage Kitson is a peculiar looking fellow - think a participant in a '70s porn film with a PhD in physics and the dress sense of a tramp - onstage his face, as he puts it, makes "comedic sense". Witness last year's winsome show, 'Love, Innocence And The Word Cock', for which he was shortlisted for the Perrier Award. A hymn to adolescence and "the law of the playground", it was a pathos-flecked, hilarious account of post-pubescent life in Yorkshire's Denby Dale, all loved-up, half-cut aunties, juvenile abuse and being diagnosed, wrongly, with Clumsy Child Syndrome. As such he has, to his chagrin, been likened to Eddie Izzard ("That's just lazy journalism") and, thanks to his specs and hapless way with girls, been called a geek. "Does that offend me?" he queries. "Well, I don't think, 'Oh, I don't wanna be a geek'. But by the same token, I don't think, 'Oh, being a geek will give me a way in'. I don't really care either way'."

This is a typical Kitson response. Today at least he doesn't really care about too much. He doesn't care for interviews, which aren't "part of my plan", and "can't be arsed" with TV despite the fact he's landed the role of "a gormless lad who bumbles about in the background" in Peter Kay's forthcoming 'Phoenix Nights' series. Not that Kitson's surly, you understand. Oh no. Rather, as befits someone who's yearned to be a stand-up ever since he appeared as a finalist, aged 16, in The Daily Telegraph's open mic competition, he is simply happy to be living out his dreams. His idea of a good time: being abused onstage.

"I don't ever want to get to the stage where I'm too famous to be ripped apart," he says. "That'd be horrible. You can turn up to a gig and tear the room to pieces so everyone's going 'He's fucking brilliant', then get the tube home and no one knows who you are. It's so good that I can turn up and do gigs where people aren't like, 'Oohh, I've read about him in the culture section of The Sunday Times. Apparently he's really whimsical and last year stopped improvising"."

Certainly no one knows who he is right now. Recently, he says, he was obliged to shave his beard off, albeit temporarily, for Peter Kay's programme.

Maybe, Jockey Slut offers absentmindedly, he could work that into his routine.

"Er, how?" he says, not unreasonably. "Hi, I am Daniel Kitson and I don't have a beard'."

Paul Mardles

Daniel Kitson is on tour throughout February. 'Phoenix Nights' will be screened in the spring on Channel 4